---
title: This and that — and linker words
layout: post
author: "Marvin Johanning"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# Tagalog Diary — 2022-04-23
I am currently on the train on my way back to Bielefeld. I had a very nice time in Bavaria! As I will have a lot of time on my hand on the journey back home, I will also have a lot more opportunity to study some Tagalog. 
<!--more-->

---
## Tasks
- [x] Finish at least lesson 14
- [x] Learn some vocabulary
- [x] Speak / write a bit

---
## Interesting new words
- **ito, iyan, iyon**
	- Lesson 13 introduced a handful of new demonstrative pronouns, namely _ito_, _iyan_ and _iyon_.
	- _ito_ is used for things that are close to both the speaker and the listener (as in “this”)
	- _iyan_ is used for things that closer to the listener (similar to “this“)
	- _iyon_ is used for things that are not close to either listener or speaker (“that“)
- **-ng, na**
	- These have cropped up in other lessons before, but because it was talked about somewhat more extensively in this lesson, I decided to take a more thorough look at what exactly they are. 
	- They appear to be what is referred to as _linking particles_
	- One common usage for them is their linking of an adjective to the noun it is describing (including numbers)
		- <i>mabait <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">na</mark> babae, maganda<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">ng</mark> babae</i>, <i>isa<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">ng</mark> babae</i>
	- _na_ is used in words ending in a consonant
	- _-ng_ is used for words ending in a vowel
	- It can also, depending on context, be translated as ”who, which, what”
		- <i>aso<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">ng</mark> tumalon</i> (“the dog that jumped”), <i>bata<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">ng</mark> kumanta</i> (“the child that sang”)

---
## What was most difficult?
Lesson fourteen was, once more, rather straightforward. The only thing I had some trouble with was the _-ng, na_ linkers, but some googling helped clear that up. Getting used to the different demonstrative pronouns will also take some practice, but I do not think it will be all too difficult.

---
  
## What was learnt?
Lesson fourteen taught me how to ask whether A is B, such as “Is this umbrella expensive?” (_Mahal ba itong payong?_). Additionally, it also taught a handful of new pronouns and words for common Filipino condiments, _suka_ (“vinegar”) and _patis_ (a type of fish sauce).