---
title: Are you alright?
layout: post
author: "Marvin Johanning"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# Tagalog Diary — 2022-04-27
Kumusta! Nag-aral ako sa aking final exam sa araw na ito. I was, therefore, unable to study a lot of Tagalog, since I believe my final exam to be more important. Nevertheless, I wanted to study at least _a little_; so let’s go!
<!--more-->

---
## Colours
- <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">Word root</mark> 
- <mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Infix or root repetition</mark> 
- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Prefix</mark> 

---
## Tasks
- [x] Finish lesson 19
- [x] Learn more vocab
- [x] Write / speak a bit

---
## Interesting new words or expressions
- __ayos__
	- alright, fine, okay
	- _ayos ka lang ba?_
- __yung__
	- those, the (informal)
	- it appears to be a combination of _iyon_ and _ang_
- <b><mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Mag</mark>-<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">alala</mark></b>
	- a verb which means “to worry”
	- regular <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">mag-</mark> verb
	- the root alalá is an adjective which means “worried” or “concerned”
		- not to be confused with alála and related words (“memory”, “recollection”)

---
## What was most difficult?
The lesson was pretty straightforward, although I am still a bit confused regarding the usage of _yung_. I will have to ask about that. 

---
## What was learnt or done?
I did not really do a lot today and did not really have the time to write an extensive diary entry. This is due to the fact that I had to study for my final exam, as I already mentioned in the introduction at the top. However, I did manage to finish lesson 19, which talks mainly about how to ask someone whether or not they’re alright. It also introduces _mga_ as a plural marker, but I had already known about that before. And lastly, it introduces the verb _mag-alala_, “to worry“.